According to the original proposal, still found on the site's home page, the Gen1 Enterprise will have 3 main engines. They will be ion thrusters that give constant acceleration. This acceleration will be slow, but over time it will allow the ship to travel at great speeds. The engines will be powered nuclearly.[7] The nuclear power system will also be used to power the ship's lighting, controls, and all other equipment on board.

In addition to the main engines, there will be impulse engines for short bursts of thrust. They will be used to help the ship exit from orbit around a planet or moon quickly. They will also be used when emergency short bursts of power are needed to avoid obstacles. Unlike the main engines, the impulse engines must be much more powerful. Therefore, they will be powered by liquid propellant made of liquid Hydrogen and liquid Oxygen.

Subsequent ongoing activity in the site's forums pages have since offered numerous alternatives to this original proposal. Among these, rather than one of the variants of traditional ion engines, the use of VASIMR engines is currently being strongly considered, although this would still be powered by the 2.5 GigaWatt (output) nuclear power plants. Other possible alternatives for the main propulsion and power sources are being considered as new technologies are steadily coming into existence and being tested. Likewise, plans for the "impulse" engines are being modified, as conventional thrusters are considered too weak to be of any practical use. One option proposed would be to tap the nuclear generators directly as nuclearthermal rockets similar to the NERVA concept. Chemical rockets might still be useful as part of a reaction control thruster system, for very fine manoeuvers.


The Gen1 Enterprise is slated to cost $706 billion USD.
